# Dolphin - A GameCube and Wii Emulator

[Homepage](https://dolphin-emu.org/) | [Project Site](https://github.com/dolphin-emu/dolphin) | [Forums](https://forums.dolphin-emu.org/) | [Wiki](https://wiki.dolphin-emu.org/) | [Issue Tracker](https://bugs.dolphin-emu.org/projects/emulator/issues) | [Coding Style](https://github.com/dolphin-emu/dolphin/blob/master/Contributing.md) | [Transifex Page](https://www.transifex.com/projects/p/dolphin-emu/)

Dolphin is an emulator for running GameCube and Wii games on Windows,
Linux, macOS, and recent Android devices. It's licensed under the terms
of the GNU General Public License, version 2 or later (GPLv2+).

Please read the [FAQ](https://dolphin-emu.org/docs/faq/) before using Dolphin.

## System Requirements
### Desktop
* OS
    * Windows (7 SP1 or higher is officially supported, but Vista SP2 might also work).
    * Linux.
    * macOS (10.13 High Sierra or higher).
    * Unix-like systems other than Linux are not officially supported but might work.
* Processor
    * A CPU with SSE2 support.
    * A modern CPU (3 GHz and Dual Core, not older than 2008) is highly recommended.
* Graphics
    * A reasonably modern graphics card (Direct3D 10.0 / OpenGL 3.0).
    * A graphics card that supports Direct3D 11 / OpenGL 4.4 is recommended.

## General Requirements
This fork includes a [Rust submodule](Externals/SlippiRustExtensions) that needs to be built and linked to the final executable.
This means that you will need to install a Rust compiler for your current system; to do this, simply visit 
[rustup.rs](https://rustup.rs). Once installed, both CMake and Visual Studio should be able to automatically handle the rest for you.

## Building for Windows
Open the solution file `Source/Dolphin.sln` to build Dolphin on Windows using [Visual Studio 2019](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/thank-you-downloading-visual-studio/?sku=Community&rel=16).
Other compilers might be
able to build Dolphin on Windows but have not been tested and are not
recommended to be used. Git and Windows 10 SDK 10.0.17763.0 must be installed. You can [download it here](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/downloads/sdk-archive/). Once the solution is loaded, change the Configuration to `Release x64`, this can be done changed in the top toolbar.


You also need the June 2010 DirectX SDK, you can [download it here](https://github.com/project-slippi/Ishiiruka/releases/download/v2.2.5/DXSDK_Jun10.exe). You will most likely have issues installing this, look at [this comment](https://stackoverflow.com/a/9401911) for how to fix it. Not sure everything in it is a hard requirement.

If you have trouble with some `.lib` files missing, right click the Externals directory and click rebuild.

An installer can be created by using the `Installer.nsi` script in the
Installer directory. This will require the Nullsoft Scriptable Install System
(NSIS) to be installed. Creating an installer is not necessary to run Dolphin
since the Binary directory contains a working Dolphin distribution.

## Building for Linux and macOS
Dolphin requires [CMake](http://www.cmake.org/) for systems other than Windows. Many libraries are
bundled with Dolphin and used if they're not installed on your system. CMake
will inform you if a bundled library is used or if you need to install any
missing packages yourself.

### macOS Build Steps:
1. `mkdir build`
2. `cd build`
3. `cmake ..`
4. `make`

An application bundle will be created in `./Binaries`.

If you are building on Mojave, you will need to install the 10.11 and 10.14 SDKs to build because Quicktime has been removed in the latest SDKs. Find the sdk version here https://github.com/phracker/MacOSX-SDKs and copy it to 
`/Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer/Platforms/MacOSX.platform/Developer/SDKs`. You should not need to modify the plist file as the project readme seems to indicate.

If you are building on Catalina, you only need to install the 10.14 SDK.

### Linux Build Steps:
There are two builds of Slippi Dolphin, the netplay and playback build. To build each you can use the given build scripts or read them to understand how to do your own.

`./build-linux.sh [playback]` will generate a dolphin binary. The binary will be written to `./build/Binaries/`.
`./build-appimage.sh [playback]` will generate an AppImage with the binary you generated by running build-linux.sh.

## Command Line Usage
`Usage: Dolphin [-h] [-d] [-l] [-e <str>] [-b] [-V <str>] [-A <str>]`  

* -h, --help Show this help message  
* -d, --debugger Opens the debugger  
* -l, --logger Opens the logger  
* -e, --exec=<str> Loads the specified file (DOL,ELF,WAD,GCM,ISO)  
* -b, --batch Exit Dolphin with emulator  
* -V, --video_backend=<str> Specify a video backend  
* -A, --audio_emulation=<str> Low level (LLE) or high level (HLE) audio  

Available DSP emulation engines are HLE (High Level Emulation) and
LLE (Low Level Emulation). HLE is fast but often less accurate while LLE is
slow but close to perfect. Note that LLE has two submodes (Interpreter and
Recompiler), which cannot be selected from the command line.

Available video backends are "D3D" (only available on Windows) and
"OGL". There's also "Software Renderer", which uses the CPU for rendering and
is intended for debugging purposes only.

## Sys Files
* `totaldb.dsy`: Database of symbols (for devs only)
* `GC/font_ansi.bin`: font dumps
* `GC/font_sjis.bin`: font dumps
* `GC/dsp_coef.bin`: DSP dumps
* `GC/dsp_rom.bin`: DSP dumps
* `Wii/clientca.pem`: Wii network certificate
* `Wii/clientcacakey.pem`: Wii network certificate
* `Wii/rootca.pem`: Wii network certificate

The DSP dumps included with Dolphin have been written from scratch and do not
contain any copyrighted material. They should work for most purposes, however
some games implement copy protection by checksumming the dumps. You will need
to dump the DSP files from a console and replace the default dumps if you want
to fix those issues.

Wii network certificates must be extracted from a Wii IOS. A guide for that can be found [here](https://wiki.dolphin-emu.org/index.php?title=Wii_Network_Guide).

## Folder Structure
These folders are installed read-only and should not be changed:

* `GameSettings`: per-game default settings database
* `GC`: DSP and font dumps
* `Maps`: symbol tables (dev only)
* `Shaders`: post-processing shaders
* `Themes`: icon themes for GUI
* `Resources`: icons that are theme-agnostic
* `Wii`: default Wii NAND contents

## Packaging and udev
The Data folder contains a udev rule file for the official GameCube controller
adapter and the Mayflash DolphinBar. Package maintainers can use that file in their packages for Dolphin.
Users compiling Dolphin on Linux can also just copy the file to their udev 
rules folder.

## User Folder Structure
A number of user writeable directories are created for caching purposes or for
allowing the user to edit their contents. On macOS and Linux these folders are
stored in `~/Library/Application Support/Dolphin/` and `~/.dolphin-emu`
respectively. On Windows the user directory is stored in the `My Documents`
folder by default, but there are various way to override this behavior:

* Creating a file called `portable.txt` next to the Dolphin executable will
  store the user directory in a local directory called "User" next to the
  Dolphin executable.
* If the registry string value `LocalUserConfig` exists in
  `HKEY_CURRENT_USER/Software/Dolphin Emulator` and has the value **1**,
  Dolphin will always start in portable mode.
* If the registry string value `UserConfigPath` exists in
  `HKEY_CURRENT_USER/Software/Dolphin Emulator`, the user folders will be
  stored in the directory given by that string. The other two methods will be
  prioritized over this setting.


List of user folders:

* `Cache`: used to cache the ISO list
* `Config`: configuration files
* `Dump`: anything dumped from Dolphin
* `GameConfig`: additional settings to be applied per-game
* `GC`: memory cards and system BIOS
* `Load`: custom textures
* `Logs`: logs, if enabled
* `ScreenShots`: screenshots taken via Dolphin
* `StateSaves`: save states
* `Wii`: Wii NAND contents

## Custom Textures
Custom textures have to be placed in the user directory under
`Load/Textures/[GameID]/`. You can find the Game ID by right-clicking a game
in the ISO list and selecting "ISO Properties".
